# Internationalization in Addle

Addle's source code and development documentation are written in American 
English. The application itself is localization-ready and can be translated into
any of the numerous languages supported by Qt. Any translation help is welcome,
and translators do not need to write any code.

Addle uses Qt's internationalization tools. The directory "etc/l10n" contains TS
files, which contain the application text for a given langauge
(currently, August 2020 only American English), and can be edited using an 
application called Qt Linguist. The TS files are used to generate QM files (a
more efficient binary format) in "resources/l10n", which are used by Qt to
acquire text in the user's language. If a translation isn't available for a
message, the American English version is used.

More information:
- https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/internationalization.html
- https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qtlinguist-index.html
- https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/linguist-id-based-i18n.html


Every message that is displayed to the user has a "TrId" (translation ID), which
is a string that uniquely identifies that message. The function `qtTrId()` is
used in code to acquire the text for a given TrId. For example:

```c++
action_onSpiff->setToolTip(qtTrId("ui.spiff.description"));
```

Addle's TrIds consist of one or more "segments", where each segment is a
kebab-case name, and segments are separated by dots (`.`). This format has no
special meaning to Qt, but is useful for organizing TrIds into categories based
on their context and role.

Some TrIds are constructed dynamically where one or more of the segments is
based on information known at run-time. To acquire the translation in this case,
call `dynamic_qtTrId()` (declared in "utilities/strings.hpp"), such as:

```c++
QString Spiff::text() const
{
    return dynamic_qtTrId({"spiff", _id.key(), "name"});
}
```

Qt provides special syntax in comments to assign meta-data to TrIds. For
example:

```c++
//: A comment for the translator goes here
//% "American English version of the text goes here"
const char* const Freem = QT_TRID_NOOP("debug-messages.freem");
```

This metadata will be recognized by Qt translation tools if they are placed 
above any line containing `qtTrId()` or `QT_TRID_NOOP()`.

Generally, **default English message text should not be defined in the source 
code**, and should instead be left in the "en_US.ts" file. This helps separate
the concerns of development and user documentation. Exceptions are made in a few 
cases, where the message text is trivial or contextualized by the code that uses 
it (e.g., debug messages).

If a message is expected to expand arguments, (and a default version is not 
given) then the arguments must be specified in the comment for the translator.

```c++
//: %1 = the number of freems currently in the manager
_text = qtTrId("ui.freem-manager.freem-count-message");
```

## Categories of TrIds

(This section is likely to change/expand as the project develops)

Basic categories (first segment) of TrIds include:

- `brushes` Strings associated with brushes.
- `cli-messages` "Command Line Interface" messages
    - `cli-messages.options` Help text for command line options
- `debug-messages` These are a low priority for translators as there are a lot
of them, they often reference entities in the code with English names, and they
are not meant to be seen by most users.
- `global`
    - `global.addle-name` A transliteration of "Addle"
    - `global.addle-tagline` A translation of Addle's project tagline "Pretty 
    little drawing program and image utility."
    - `global.color-names`
        - `global.color-names.black`
- `templates`
    - `templates.affix-units` A special formatter string that affixes a unit of 
    measure to a number.
    - `templates.layer-name` Generates a name for the Nth layer in a document.
    - `templates.layer-group-name` ditto, but for layer groups. 
- `tools` Strings associated with tools.
- `ui` Strings associated with elements of the UI.
- `units` Names of units of measurement.
    

Some TrIds are associated with entities designated by an `AddleId`, e.g.,
`brushes` and `tools`. These are likely to have the `AddleId::key()` as the
second segment of the TrId.

Subcategories of `tools.<tool-id>` are often associated with options or
properties specific to that tool.

A number of TrIds have `name` or `description` as their final segments, these
identify the names and descriptions of the respective entity, as shown to the
user. Favor names like these over `tool-tip` or `label-text`.
